An efficient method of calling C++ functions from numba/Python using clang++/ctypes/rbc (#266)
Quansight-Labs/quansight-labs-site: posts/2021/10/cxx-numba-interoperability.md

<!--
.. title: An efficient method of calling C++ functions from numba using clang++/ctypes/rbc
.. slug: cxx-numba-interoperability
.. date: 2021-10-06 10:30:58 UTC-05:00
.. author: Pearu Peterson
.. tags: numba, c++, python, ctypes, rbc
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

# An efficient method of calling C++ functions from numba/Python using clang++/ctypes/rbc

## Introduction

The aim of this document is to explore a method of calling C++ library

> functions from [Numba](http://numba.pydata.org/) [jitted

Reviewer: I think perhaps `JITied --> Just in time compiled` makes sense over `jitted`.

functions](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/user/jit.html#compiling-python-code-with-jit)
--- Python functions that are decorated with

> ``numpa.jit(nopython=True)``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``numpa.jit(nopython=True)``. Throughout this post we refer to such decorated functions as JITied or Just In Time compiled functions.
```

Author: With the use of "Numba compiled functions", I think this suggestion becomes unnecessary.

While there exists ways to wrap C++ codes to Python, calling these
wrappers from Numba jittied functions may not be as straightforward
and efficient as one would hope. The underlying problem to inefficency
is that the Python/C++ wrappers are designed to be called on Python
objects. For instance, with keeping in mind the aim of this post, a

> call to a Numba jitted function would involve converting a Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
call to a Numba JITied function would involve converting a Python
```

object to a low-level object, say, to some C/C++ equivalent intrinsic
type or structure, then converting it back to Python object to be

> passed to the Python/C++ wrapper function, that would convert the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
passed to the Python/C++ wrapper function. Then this wrapper function would convert the
```

Python object (again) to an equivalent C/C++ type object which can be
finally passed to the underlying C++ library function. The return
value of the C++ function would be transformed several times as well,

> just in the opposite direction of the functions calling sequence. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
just in the opposite direction of the function's calling sequence. In
```

> sum, all these object transformations may build up a considerable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
totality, all these object transformations may build up a considerable
```

overhead of calling otherwise highly efficient C++ library functions
from Python.

Another difficulty with calling C++ library functions from Numba
originates from
[name-mangling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Name_mangling) that C++
compilers apply to function names in order to support function/method
overloadings as well as other relevant C++ language features. In
principle, one would be able to call such a C++ library function

> directly from Numba jitted function (using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directly from any Numba JITied function (using the 
```

[numba.cfunc](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/user/cfunc.html)
feature) if one would know how the C++ compiler transforms the
function name internally . However, the name-mangling algorithm is C++
compiler vendor dependent, and in practice, it would be hard to
predict the mangled name in a portable manner.

## cxx2py.py tool

In this post, we'll introduce a straightforward and efficient method

> of calling C++ library functions from Numba jitted functions that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of calling C++ library functions from Numba JITied functions that
```

circumvents the name-mangling problem. The method is based on

> determining the addresses of C++ library functions at runtime that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
determining the addresses of C++ library functions at runtime which
```

> together with functions signatures can be used to set up an highly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
together with functions signatures are then used to set up a highly
```

efficient calling sequence.  This method will require creating a small
C/C++ wrapper library that contains ``export "C"``-attributed
functions which return the addresses of C++ libray functions and that
can be easily called from Python using various techniques, here we use
[ctypes](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html).

A Python script
[cxx2py.py](https://github.com/pearu/pearu.github.io/tree/main/cxx2py/cxx2py.py)

> is provided that auto-generates, from user-supplied C++ header and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is provided that auto-generates, from a user-supplied C++ header and
```

source files, the C/C++ wrapper library as well as a Python
[ctypes](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html) wrapper
module. The Python module contains ``ctypes`` definitions of C++

> library functions that Numba jitted functions are able to call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
library functions that Numba JITied functions are able to call
```

> directly without requiring the expensive object transformations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directly without requiring the expensive and redundant object transformations
```

mentioned above. An alternative to using ``ctypes`` in the Python

> wrapper module would Numba [Wrapper Address Protocol -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wrapper module would be to use the Numba [Wrapper Address Protocol -
```

WAP](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/reference/types.html#wrapper-address-protocol-wap)

> that usage should be considered if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Its usage should be considered if the 
```

[ctypes](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html) "C++
expressiveness" turns out to be insufficient.

Currently, the supported features in the ``cxx2py.py`` tool include:

- wrapping of C++ library functions with scalar inputs and return
  values,

> - supported C++ functions may be defined inside C++ namespaces,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- supporting C++ functions which may be defined inside C++ namespaces,
```

> - supported C++ functions may be static class member functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- supporting C++ functions which may be static class member functions.
```

The ``cxx2py.py`` tool can be extended to support other C++ features

> such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as:
```

- creating C++ class/struct instances from Python,

> - passing C++ class/struct instances around,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- passing C++ class/struct instances to-and-fro between languages,
```

- calling the methods of C++ class/struct instances,
- supporting pointer types as function inputs and return values,
- etc.

The ``cxx2py.py`` tool uses ``clang++`` to parse C++ header files and

> to build the C/C++ wrapper shared library. It also uses [RBC - Remote

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to build the C/C++ wrapper shared library. It also uses the [RBC - Remote
```

<!--
.. title: An efficient method of calling C++ functions from numba using clang++/ctypes/rbc
.. slug: cxx-numba-interoperability

> .. date: 2021-10-07 10:30:58

Reviewer 2: @rgommers @pearu i'm suggesting to schedule this to be published tomorrow. are there any major blockers that would hinder that?

## Introduction

The aim of this document is to explore a method of calling C++ library
functions from [Numba](http://numba.pydata.org/) [compiled
functions](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/user/jit.html#compiling-python-code-with-jit)
--- Python functions that are decorated with
``numpa.jit(nopython=True)``.

While there exist ways to wrap C++ codes to Python, calling these

> wrappers from Numba JITied functions is often not as straightforward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wrappers from Numba compiled functions is often not as straightforward
```
